Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
So as I said a few times, I think it's
NOTE CONF
a time to slow down a little bit, take a
breather, because this is essentially a break between a couple
NOTE CONF
of sections of the course.
So this has been about logic and proof.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to do one more logical thing next
week part of this week.
NOTE CONF
and then after that, we move on to thinking about
computation more directly.
NOTE CONF
What we do next will be a kind of bridge
between them, but we've introduced quite a lot of stuff.
NOTE CONF
We've introduced logic, um, propositional logic.
So logistic logic and we've introduced various ways of proving.
NOTE CONF
And I haven't been looking at the tutorial marks.
Overall, I think a lot of people are fairly happy
NOTE CONF
with everything, but not everybody is.
So as I told you, I plan for today to
NOTE CONF
be basically going back over anything you would like me
to go back over and doing any problems or answering
NOTE CONF
any questions.
And the idea is that we do them, not me.
NOTE CONF
Um, so over to you.
What would you like me to do?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the existential assumption is still worrying some people.
NOTE CONF
How many people are still a bit worried by the
existential assumption?
NOTE CONF
More and more and more.
A few um, so I guess there are a couple
NOTE CONF
of aspects of it.
Is the UN clarity what it is or why we're
NOTE CONF
talking about it?
Um, in particular, I think maybe.
NOTE CONF
It's probably easiest if I write on the screen, because
then the people online can see more easily, and I
NOTE CONF
can also state it around.
So one question is.
NOTE CONF
Then what's the the meaning of universal quantification.
So universal quantification we expect to mean for all x.
NOTE CONF
But what is x.
So for us x means all x in some universe.
NOTE CONF
I forget what what kind of symbol did I use
for universes right at the start of the course?
NOTE CONF
Was it curly letters?
I can't remember.
NOTE CONF
Let's use curly letters.
That's supposed to be a curly X.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've got some universe, and we make some
statement that for all x.
NOTE CONF
P of x is true.
And the thing that confuses Fuses many people.
NOTE CONF
And that leads to the difference between us and Aristotle
is whether the empty universe is legitimate.
NOTE CONF
Do we allow the empty universe as a sensible thing
to talk about?
NOTE CONF
So I've been trying to indoctrinate you for five, six
weeks now, five weeks about the right answer to this.
NOTE CONF
But possibly indoctrination isn't the most reasonable way of doing
things.
NOTE CONF
So who is completely happy with the idea that it
makes sense to talk about logic in an empty universe?
NOTE CONF
Okay, who thinks it's definitely a bit odd?
Only one.
NOTE CONF
So that leaves about 90% of you uncommitted.
So what do you think?
NOTE CONF
Somebody who didn't raise a hand at all.
What do you think about it?
NOTE CONF
If I had a better memory, I would point at
one of you, but I don't.
NOTE CONF
I suppose this gets back or down to a rather
fundamental thing about mathematics.
NOTE CONF
So making a decision about whether we should talk about
empty universes.
NOTE CONF
What kind of decision is that?
Is it a mathematical decision forced on us by logic?
NOTE CONF
Is it, um.
Is it a matter of personal preference?
NOTE CONF
Is it a matter of sociological preference?
Yeah, I guess it's so that we can take into
NOTE CONF
account Is.
So?
NOTE CONF
So we can take into account things.
That sounds like a kind of pragmatic reason.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so fundamentally, I think what I've been arguing is
NOTE CONF
that it simply makes life easier.
Um, so many of you have already programmed in languages
NOTE CONF
with arrays.
If you programmed in any civilised language with arrays, array
NOTE CONF
indexes started at zero.
Did you have to get used to that?
NOTE CONF
Was it surprising?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anybody find it completely natural from the beginning?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Did anybody go to a primary school where the way
NOTE CONF
you counted was 012 at age five?
Possibly.
NOTE CONF
Places exist 5 or 6.
Seven, depending on which country you first went to school
NOTE CONF
in.
Um, so is zero a natural number?
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's an interesting question.
No it's not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's not an interesting question.
NOTE CONF
It's a completely trivial question, but it's a question that
people can still argue about.
NOTE CONF
So a quick straw poll is zero a natural number,
not natural.
NOTE CONF
Oh, very few yes's.
Who says no zero is not a natural number?
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is a binary question.
A number is either a natural number or it isn't.
NOTE CONF
So there's no excuse for not having answered one way
or the other.
NOTE CONF
If you really pushed me like this, I'm going to
have to get whew clap out.
NOTE CONF
Except I don't know how to use woo clap yet,
so you're safe.
NOTE CONF
Um, you might like to know that we use woo
clap in university Senate meetings for taking votes, so I
NOTE CONF
know how to use it as a customer, but not
as a lecturer.
NOTE CONF
Um, so is there a natural number?
It's a matter of definition, right?
NOTE CONF
And when I say natural number, I mean whatever we
mean by that, that symbol that we use to represent
NOTE CONF
the natural numbers.
Um, so if at school, we tend to get taught
NOTE CONF
that the natural numbers are one, two, three, as soon
as you get into university maths, university pure maths, at
NOTE CONF
any rate you get told that the natural start at
zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, why?
Because it just makes life easier.
NOTE CONF
It happens to be easier to set up a working,
consistent, logical mathematical universe.
NOTE CONF
If the first, if the most fundamental thing you can
think of is zero rather than one, but it's not
NOTE CONF
critically important.
It's kind of the same with this universal quantification.
NOTE CONF
Can we talk about quantifying over the empty universe?
Well, we can decide that it means something.
NOTE CONF
And it turns out by the consensus of about 150
years of modern logic, that it's much easier if we
NOTE CONF
can.
Aristotle was many things.
NOTE CONF
He was a philosopher, not just a logician.
In fact, logicians as such didn't exist.
NOTE CONF
So he would have said he was a philosopher.
And for him, the idea of talking about a bunch
NOTE CONF
of things that don't exist is meaningless.
If we are going to talk about quantification over the
NOTE CONF
empty universe, then what does it mean?
If we say for every unit, every unicorn has one
NOTE CONF
horn and there are no unicorns, then should that be
a true statement?
NOTE CONF
Um, I argued, yes, but of course that also means
every unicorn has two horns should be a true statement
NOTE CONF
if there are no unicorns or indeed any other statement.
So there are interesting questions there about dealing with counterfactual
NOTE CONF
worlds.
And there we get into a whole other realm of
NOTE CONF
logic.
But fundamentally, the existential assumption is about making this decision,
NOTE CONF
that logic is cleaner if you can quantify over empty
sets.
NOTE CONF
And that means that.
If I write in first order logic.
NOTE CONF
For all x, p of x implies q of x
if it's the case that.
NOTE CONF
If p of x is false of everything you're talking
about.
NOTE CONF
In other words, there are no things that are p
of x.
NOTE CONF
Then the universal statement in modern logic is true.
For every thing x p of x implies q of
NOTE CONF
x, false implies anything is true.
And that's how we translate the Aristotelian term.
NOTE CONF
Every p is q.
And for Aristotle then we're saying but there aren't any
NOTE CONF
p.
And so he considered that a silly thing to say.
NOTE CONF
We don't.
So if we want to do Aristotle's reasoning, we need
NOTE CONF
to add the assumption to our basic reasoning techniques that
whenever we talk about something, it exists.
NOTE CONF
Hence, what we really want to write in modern logic
is.
NOTE CONF
That whatever predicate we might talk about.
There is something which satisfies it.
NOTE CONF
But we were doing syllogisms, so we didn't have modern
logic to hand.
NOTE CONF
So you started this long digression, not digression.
Is that the point that you're unhappy about so far,
NOTE CONF
or is it the the actual formulation that we come
to?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I think what we said.
NOTE CONF
So that's how we wrote the existential assumption.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And it's a very weird thing at first sight, because
it says it is not the case that A entails,
NOTE CONF
not a and that seems odd because what does.
A entails not a mean.
NOTE CONF
That's clearly nonsense, right.
Because things can't be both A and not a, but
NOTE CONF
what that really means turned into first order logic.
Is for everything in the universe, a of x implies
NOTE CONF
not a of x.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then we go back up to where we were
before and say if A is false about everything in
NOTE CONF
the universe, then this statement is actually always true because
A is A of x is false for every x,
NOTE CONF
and therefore the implication because of this weird way implication
behaves is also true.
NOTE CONF
So it is possible for this sequence whole, but it's
only possible to hold if the universe is empty.
NOTE CONF
So therefore, if we simply cross it out, we're saying
the universe is not empty.
NOTE CONF
For you walking out there.
But you're just getting closer.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
This is readable.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Very readable.
NOTE CONF
So and then the the other aspect of the formulation
was this vertical line.
NOTE CONF
Remember what we're doing when we write a proof rule
is saying from what's on top what's on the bottom
NOTE CONF
follows.
So if we leave the top blank that says what's
NOTE CONF
below follows from nothing at all.
So it's always true.
NOTE CONF
So we've got various sorts of always true going on
here.
NOTE CONF
And we have the rules and the implication and the
sequent.
NOTE CONF
Does that help?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anybody else?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So applying the existential assumption to some syllogism that sounds
like a good thing to do.
NOTE CONF
Um, this means you want me to prove a syllogism
in front of you or produce a counterexample, right?
NOTE CONF
Or something.
Um, let's try to derive one of the Aristotelian syllogisms
NOTE CONF
from Barbara.
I hope I can do this.
NOTE CONF
Um, anybody have the book handy to save me?
Trying to look it up.
NOTE CONF
Can you find me an Aristotelian existential syllogism that isn't
valid for us, but is for Aristotle.
NOTE CONF
Not very quickly, but neither can I find one very
quickly, except the one that was in the tutorial.
NOTE CONF
But that would be boring.
Um, I have some slides on them, didn't I?
NOTE CONF
But I didn't list the others.
No.
NOTE CONF
That was a good example, I think.
Um, it was, but then presumably you've all just done
NOTE CONF
it, so therefore you don't need to go through it
again.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
That's interesting.
It's better.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I thought he had a list of them.
NOTE CONF
Have I mentioned that you shouldn't use the Wikipedia page
on syllogisms?
NOTE CONF
So I don't know why it's linked in the book.
It's a lousy page.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
So.
NOTE CONF
Um, the ones that we don't believe to be true.
Okay, here's here's an example, Bob, about about a let
NOTE CONF
me get that out of the way and write it
down in symbolic form.
NOTE CONF
So this syllogism says.
If A entails B.
NOTE CONF
And C entails a.
Then some Greeks see.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is an Aristotelian syllogism supposedly.
NOTE CONF
Is it valid for us?
No.
NOTE CONF
Let me look further back in the room.
What can we say that tells us instantly that why
NOTE CONF
it's not valid for us?
You don't have a pair of knobs?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
There's not.
NOTE CONF
So there's only one negated syllogism.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Or to think about it another way.
Remember, the way we've set up syllogisms things with entails
NOTE CONF
a universal statements and things with not entails existential statements.
So this is making a formal statement and a formal
NOTE CONF
statement.
And therefore, for us as modern logicians, we haven't asserted
NOTE CONF
that anything exists, but on the bottom it's asserting something
exists.
NOTE CONF
So with a bit of luck, we can derive that
from Barbara and the existential assumption whether we can actually
NOTE CONF
do that online.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
So somebody tell me what I might do.
So what I'm trying to do here is to build
NOTE CONF
a proof that the bottom holds.
And somewhere up top I want to use the existential
NOTE CONF
assumption.
Which means I would probably.
NOTE CONF
quite like to have the negation on the top.
How could I get the negation to the top?
NOTE CONF
Well, actually, you know, maybe I don't want to do
that.
NOTE CONF
Whatever I do, there's going to be a negation here.
So which of these predicates?
NOTE CONF
I've got three predicates A, b and C, which is
the one where I'm asserting existence on the bottom.
NOTE CONF
C c yeah.
Agreed.
NOTE CONF
So I'm saying that some c are b because I'm
saying that seed is not entail not b.
NOTE CONF
So it's a fairly good bet.
That I'm going to need to use that assumption that
NOTE CONF
C exists in order to prove this.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You.
Can propose the print.
NOTE CONF
Which the.
So if we can propose the second premise and conclusion.
NOTE CONF
We get that.
So he.
NOTE CONF
Then confirms the first premise by itself.
Okay, so I was listening.
NOTE CONF
We know that not be not be and.
Then see is you know so.
NOTE CONF
So.
So I say that again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I sort of swap these round then I
get a Barbara shaped top.
NOTE CONF
So we know that.
From Barbara we get.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Not a yes.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so that again.
Is one element.
NOTE CONF
Then, you know.
Can we make that a formal up?
NOTE CONF
Put that into a rule somewhere.
Some of you did the exercise in the tutorial, so
NOTE CONF
can you apply what you did there to this slightly
different one?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we plug these two together.
Plug these two together to get the result.
NOTE CONF
That's a much more complicated piece of reasoning than just
doing the manipulation from Barbara, where if you take any
NOTE CONF
of our sound syllogisms, the 15 of them, you can
just work.
NOTE CONF
Well, I find it easier to work backwards, but here
you have to work out how to plug the existential
NOTE CONF
assumption into the proof you're doing.
So that was done on the fly, and it's not
NOTE CONF
terribly clear.
Would it be helpful for me to take this and
NOTE CONF
after this lecture, write it out in a neat form
and post the result?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah, of course this is a bad move because that
NOTE CONF
means it's more work for me, whereas you're the ones
supposed to be doing the work, but never mind.
NOTE CONF
Um, doing proofs live is something I have always found
very difficult.
NOTE CONF
So that's why I ask you to do it because
many of you are better at it than I am.
NOTE CONF
What do you think a proof is?
So what we've been doing here is trying to show
NOTE CONF
that a particular particular conclusion is sound.
By assuming particular premises and by applying some rules that,
NOTE CONF
let us say a conclusion follows from these premises.
Are we doing something real or are we just shuffling
NOTE CONF
symbols around?
You may possibly have never thought about this issue, but
NOTE CONF
it's something that worries mathematicians.
Well, it doesn't worry concerns mathematicians quite a lot.
NOTE CONF
Is mathematics real?
If it is real, what kind of real is it?
NOTE CONF
Um.
So I guess that depends.
NOTE CONF
Do you believe that there could be a different universe
in which, um, Pythagoras theorem was false?
NOTE CONF
You do?
Okay, interesting.
NOTE CONF
So how are you stating Pythagoras theorem for that?
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Okay, so Pythagorean geometry, Pythagoras theorem is a statement about
NOTE CONF
triangles in the plane in a Euclidean plane.
Um, you should know this is Pythagoras.
NOTE CONF
Is Pythagoras theorem true for triangles that we draw on
the surface of the Earth?
NOTE CONF
No.
Anybody not know that?
NOTE CONF
So the flatness of the surface is essential.
And the easiest way to think, to see that is
NOTE CONF
to think about the globe.
I'm no good at drawing three dimensional objects, but let's
NOTE CONF
try anyway.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So there's the Earth and there's the equator and there's
the pole.
NOTE CONF
If you think about this triangle.
Has 390 degree angles in it, but it's a triangle
NOTE CONF
on the surface of a sphere.
And so Pythagoras doesn't apply on the.
NOTE CONF
And none of the triangle geometry applies.
Um, and of course, those of you who are doing
NOTE CONF
physics or have done some physics know that whatever else
the universe is, it is probably not a Euclidean geometry.
NOTE CONF
Actually, that's not Pythagoras theorem anyways.
It's you have to get something else to make a
NOTE CONF
Pythagorean nonsense out of it.
Um, so there's an issue about what mathematics is, to
NOTE CONF
the extent that it's a universal truth and what it
is to the extent that it's true in the universe
NOTE CONF
we're working on, and whether logic is a universal truth.
So if you ask a logician.
NOTE CONF
They will say that logic is a universal truth.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Fundamentally, because we are symbols shuffling what we do when
we do logic, or if we do group theory, which
NOTE CONF
you will be doing if you're doing maths or Newtonian
dynamics, you set up some assumptions.
NOTE CONF
You set up some equations which you think are a
model of the world.
NOTE CONF
If it's the world you're modelling and then you prove
some stuff using those equations and definitions, and then it's
NOTE CONF
up to you to validate whether your conclusion actually works
in the real world.
NOTE CONF
If you're doing applied mathematics.
As I said in the very beginning of the lecture,
NOTE CONF
in logic, we have lots of different forms of logic.
So we're giving you classical logic.
NOTE CONF
But classical logic is not always the right logic to
be talking about a particular real life problem, because you
NOTE CONF
may be talking about a problem involving people's beliefs involving
probabilities, where classical logic is simply not a good model.
NOTE CONF
So mathematicians tend to be quite schizophrenic about this.
Um, who has heard of the term Platonism?
NOTE CONF
Two.
Any advance on two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Two and a half.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Platonism is.
This is a simplification because it's always more complicated.
NOTE CONF
Platonism is a philosophical view point that things are real,
and in particular mathematical objects are real.
NOTE CONF
So the real numbers exist, complex numbers exist.
The wavefunction of the electron exists.
NOTE CONF
And as I go through those, through through those three
things, you might be more and more sceptical about whether
NOTE CONF
they actually exist.
But I think most working Mathematicians go through their everyday
NOTE CONF
lives on the basis that we're talking about things that
exist.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, it's impossible to come up with
a very convincing justification for why these things exist.
NOTE CONF
We can't even come up with a justification for ourselves
existing.
NOTE CONF
So how do I know you're there?
How do I know I'm here?
NOTE CONF
Could all be in a simulation.
I don't believe we are.
NOTE CONF
I don't believe those arguments.
But that's a matter of faith rather than reason.
NOTE CONF
And so there's an alternative view which says that mathematics
is simply symbol shuffling according to derived rules.
NOTE CONF
We have some symbols, we have rules for transforming symbols.
And what comes out of the end is just what
NOTE CONF
comes out at the end according to our particular rules.
And this is a very computer science way of thinking
NOTE CONF
about logic.
But curiously, it led on to some very important and
NOTE CONF
profound developments in logic.
Even if you think logic is real, which we will
NOTE CONF
not be able to cover in this lecture in this
course, but which you will meet later on, and at
NOTE CONF
the moment I'm wasting time.
Enthusiastically.
NOTE CONF
Let me stop wasting time and say, what else would
you like to discuss?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That's.
NOTE CONF
The one where I split the universe in half.
That was the way of the comma, I believe.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, I don't believe I would.
NOTE CONF
Was that this lecture week or last week?
I've got an hour.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so that was this.
NOTE CONF
I'm not entirely sure that I would have chosen to
put this in had I been writing the course or
NOTE CONF
the book in the first place, but it's essentially trying
to justify the use of these.
NOTE CONF
Let me get my red circle up again.
The use of these sequence with sets of premises on
NOTE CONF
the left and right hand side.
So if I'm thinking about a whole bunch of things
NOTE CONF
together with a entailed B.
How do I think about that?
NOTE CONF
I mean, we've said that comma means and and the
sets are really separated by commas.
NOTE CONF
So logically speaking, I'm saying everything in and of everything
in gamma together with Anded with A gives you B.
NOTE CONF
Um, but that's not the way I tend to be
thinking about it, because if I'm looking at a particular
NOTE CONF
proof when I'm doing one stage in a proof, remember
you're looking for a one rule to apply, and the
NOTE CONF
rules all talk about one thing on the left and
one thing on the right.
NOTE CONF
And doing something.
To one of them, or usually just one thing on
NOTE CONF
the right and just one thing on the left.
So there's the exchange will even.
NOTE CONF
That's one thing.
So we're only looking at one thing.
NOTE CONF
But often when I'm deciding what to do here, I
might be looking for a rule that I can apply
NOTE CONF
to a.
And it might be that what's in gamma is just
NOTE CONF
some stuff that is going to be carried around for
several steps in the proof.
NOTE CONF
We're doing short proofs.
So even if you look at proofs like.
NOTE CONF
This one.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So if you look at this proof here, then once
we've broken down the right hand side, you with a
NOTE CONF
comma on the right so that this p splits off
into the comma.
NOTE CONF
Remember that bit okay.
So this p is now being carried all the way
NOTE CONF
up this tree and all the way up this tree
without ever changing.
NOTE CONF
So it's not what we're focusing on and all the
things we're not focusing on.
NOTE CONF
We can shuffle off into Delta on the right or
gamma on the left.
NOTE CONF
Um, and where does the other way of thinking about
it come?
NOTE CONF
So that's this idea of thinking about gamma as the
background assumptions at this stage in the proof, when we
NOTE CONF
look at the Venn diagram, this is the Venn diagram
for A entails B, which remember says the a only
NOTE CONF
bit is empty because every A must be in here
in B.
NOTE CONF
But when we have the gamma in here A entails
B is only true when all of gamma are there
NOTE CONF
as well, because we need the gamma and A to
entail B.
NOTE CONF
So in terms of the Venn diagram, it's saying we
know it's empty provided that gamma holds.
NOTE CONF
And here I'm just splitting the universe into the bit
where gamma all hold and the bit where any of
NOTE CONF
gamma doesn't hold.
So I'm not really sure that the diagram is terribly
NOTE CONF
useful.
It's there for people who like diagrammatic reasoning.
NOTE CONF
And presumably Mike Foreman, who wrote this, likes diagrammatic reasoning
because he put all these Venn diagrams in in the
NOTE CONF
first place.
I'm a symbolic reasoner, so it doesn't do much for
NOTE CONF
me.
But some people like diagrams.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah, since I've said that.
So in your own view of yourself, how many people
NOTE CONF
would say they're primarily pictorial reasoners.
Diagrammatic reasoners?
NOTE CONF
Very few.
Primarily symbolic reasoners.
NOTE CONF
Very few, but slightly more.
Um, which leaves a lot of people who are either
NOTE CONF
equally happy with both or equally unhappy with both.
Um.
NOTE CONF
How do you reason?
Comes up with.
NOTE CONF
How do you program as well?
So I notice on Piazza a few places where Don
NOTE CONF
has been saying you cannot do programming by trial and
error.
NOTE CONF
And I'm sure that observation is addressed to many more
than the one person it was addressed to at the
NOTE CONF
time.
But of course, it's also true.
NOTE CONF
In maths you can't do maths by trial and error.
But let's be honest about it.
NOTE CONF
The process of actually constructing a mathematical proof can involve
quite a lot of trial and error thinking.
NOTE CONF
Maybe this is the way I go about it, but
then you have to do the rigorous steps and you
NOTE CONF
get stuck.
So you say that didn't work.
NOTE CONF
I have another idea, and this is actually true of
the best mathematicians in the world, as well as the
NOTE CONF
everyday mathematicians like us.
They have ideas, they try them out, they don't work.
NOTE CONF
They have another idea.
And these days they even ask asked ChatGPT for ideas.
NOTE CONF
How many of you heard of have heard of Terence
Tao?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so if you have any interest in modern mathematics
NOTE CONF
at all, look up Terence Tao and listen to some
of his lectures, some of his talks.
NOTE CONF
Read what he does.
He's an interesting person because he is quite possibly the
NOTE CONF
most brilliant mathematician on the planet today.
And he's also a nice, warm, ordinary human being, which
NOTE CONF
was very much not the case of most of the
great mathematicians of the last century.
NOTE CONF
Um, he was a child prodigy, so he was one
of these people who got a gold medal in the
NOTE CONF
International Mathematical Olympiad at the age of 11 or 12
or something.
NOTE CONF
Um, but unlike many child prodigies, he continued to develop
as a mathematician, and he's a quite remarkable problem solver.
NOTE CONF
So he likes digging into a new field, finding a
problem, and then solving it.
NOTE CONF
Which can be quite annoying for the people who've who've
spent their careers working on the problem, but it advances
NOTE CONF
mathematics.
The reason I mention him is because about a year
NOTE CONF
ago, when I was being very sceptical about ChatGPT, as
I still am, I was a bit shocked to receive
NOTE CONF
to listen to a talk by him where he said
ChatGPT gives me some good ideas despite the fact that
NOTE CONF
it's complete garbage, it's hallucinates nonsense, but it can still
give you ideas.
NOTE CONF
And he said it cut quite a lot of time
off finding the right way to approach some problem.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm still enthusiastically wasting time.
Um, anything else to do?
NOTE CONF
Any other concrete questions?
Nothing.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, well, I could make us sit here.
NOTE CONF
I could probably talk randomly about something else for another
seven minutes, but I'm not sure it's entirely useful.
NOTE CONF
Um, what I would ask you to do.
So if you've done the tutorial and you were happy
NOTE CONF
with it, then there's really nothing more to say.
If you did the tutorial and were unhappy with it,
NOTE CONF
so you found it difficult to do some of the
proofs in particular.
NOTE CONF
I mean, so the existential one is tricky, but the
other proofs are things you should be able to do
NOTE CONF
because they're almost unthinking.
And let me give you a heads up that it's
NOTE CONF
going to be quite important to be able to do
these proofs, or at least to understand why they're done,
NOTE CONF
because you have an exercise coming up at the end
of the course, then use Piazza and use yourselves.
NOTE CONF
So remember, we encourage you to talk to each other.
We're one of the few courses that encourages collaboration.
NOTE CONF
So if there were a bunch of people who are
feeling that they would like to work some more on
NOTE CONF
this, and if you're not sure who each other are,
then remember that you can post anonymously to each other
NOTE CONF
on Piazza so you can, if you wish, post.
Is there anybody else who would like a little self-help
NOTE CONF
group on proofs?
And if you so choose at an appropriate time and
NOTE CONF
you want me to come along, I could do so.
Although that's not the ideal.
NOTE CONF
I don't have many appropriate times, because that's the way
my job is at the moment.
NOTE CONF
But all things are possible.
Potentially.
NOTE CONF
And also tutorials.
Um, since we've got a moment.
NOTE CONF
Tutorials.
Tutorials in this course are always a little bit problematic
NOTE CONF
because there are people who really need them.
There are people don't.
NOTE CONF
I guess those of you who are attending the lecture
are not a representative sample.
NOTE CONF
So straw poll tutorials, useful or not?
So who thinks useful?
NOTE CONF
That's not really enough.
Who thinks definitely not useful.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's actually not too bad.
Um, which means some of you, quite a few of
NOTE CONF
you think they have some utility, but not a great
deal.
NOTE CONF
So if you have ideas for making them more useful,
then do tell your tutor, because we have a very
NOTE CONF
wide range of tutors and also tell us.
Okay, so unless you come back tomorrow with some very
NOTE CONF
burning questions.
I think we're going to make an early start on
NOTE CONF
the week six material, get ahead a bit, and hopefully
have a slightly more relaxed rest of the semester.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
And I will light this up a bit more neatly
NOTE CONF
and post it.
Saving it.
NOTE CONF
For the existential assumption.
And just be a Venn diagram with an exercise for
NOTE CONF
neutral.
That's it.
NOTE CONF
That's how.
And for the week six material, can you post the
NOTE CONF
reading that we should.
Yes yeah I will arrive as soon as I get
NOTE CONF
back to my office.
I'll publish the week six stuff.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
I'm coming a second time to ask about this.
NOTE CONF
So the second I left, I completely forgot.
Okay, so why is the not feeling good?
NOTE CONF
Because there can't be something.
They can't know they're not P is there?
NOTE CONF
Because it came in from here.
So we have a rule that says this thing is
NOTE CONF
an and that's the end in the middle.
So the rule for sorry the rule for and on
NOTE CONF
the right says you break it into two trees.
So this p is two there this and carries to
NOTE CONF
there.
And then this.
NOTE CONF
Not pork goes there and this not P goes there
okay.
NOTE CONF
So he did he did the.
He did.
NOTE CONF
At the same time.
Um or for the P.
NOTE CONF
No.
So so this P is just being carried through.
NOTE CONF
This is being carried through as part of a delta
on the right.
NOTE CONF
So we're not doing anything to that.
In this world, we're focusing entirely on this formula here.
NOTE CONF
And it's an end formula.
So we break it down and we have to do
NOTE CONF
two separate subtrees.
One there for this half, one there for that half.
NOTE CONF
And the P is just the stuff on the right
that's unchanged when we do this bit.
NOTE CONF
So.
We understand.
NOTE CONF
What I want just for clarification again.
So according to existential rule this uh what for us
NOTE CONF
would be like not implies equals to this um, which
would be easier to draw towards like this lower c
NOTE CONF
not implies a.
So C does not imply a.
NOTE CONF
C implies not a no.
Because this says that every C is not A, and
NOTE CONF
this says that some sea is not a.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So I thought existential assumption would work.
It makes it equal.
NOTE CONF
No not.
No.
NOTE CONF
What does existential assumption here.
How do we see it says.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it says what it says, which is that.
It just.
NOTE CONF
It says something exists.
So universal statements.
NOTE CONF
Assert for all something or other.
But they don't assert the existence.
NOTE CONF
Or existence.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So again, so the social assumption we're talking about for
example, and modal logic and thought about all universe.
NOTE CONF
And the assumption comes down to language.